# Chapter 13: On the Mountain

The common room on the first floor of General Botha Hall was a room of polished ox-blood linoleum and tall sash windows that admitted the late autumn afternoon at a slant. The chairs were arranged around two low tables in the manner of a furniture catalogue. There was a piano against the long wall that no one played. Ruth sat in the armchair nearest the door because she had learnt in the convent that the seat nearest the door was the seat that allowed her to read a room without being read.

She had attended chapel that morning in the third row as Hannah had told her to. She had eaten at the long table with twenty-two other girls and Miss Pryce had nodded to her at the head of the room. She had crossed the courtyard in a cold clean autumn light and climbed the stairs to her room and changed her stockings and put on the navy wool dress because the wool dress was the only dress she owned that did not register strain.

It was four o'clock. The Sunday tea was a fixture. The fixture had a convenor.

The convenor was already there when Ruth came in, standing at the window with a cup and saucer in her left hand, the cup balanced on the saucer without touching it. She was tall, fair, in a fawn skirt and a cream blouse with a collar that had been ironed by someone other than her. The pearls were not at her throat. The pearls were a light double row at her wrist, looped twice, which Ruth had not seen before and which seemed in some way more accurate to the woman than the throat-pearls would have been.

'Miss MacLeod,' she said, without turning her head. 'Come and have tea.'

Ruth crossed the room. The room registered her crossing. There were six other girls already seated, three in the chairs by the piano, three around the further table, and they did not look up as she passed but they did make an adjustment in their postures. Connie Hargreaves was one of the three by the piano, in a grey skirt and a pale blue cardigan, her ankles crossed. Vivienne Hartley was at the further table, leaning toward another girl, laughing at something Ruth had not heard.

'I'm Eleanor Stratford-Reid,' the woman at the window said. She turned then, and Ruth saw her face properly for the first time, the broad pale forehead, the eyes a flat colour that the afternoon light did not assist, the mouth narrow and well-shaped and entirely under instruction. 'I don't think we have actually been introduced. I've seen you in the dining hall. You sit in the corner with the girl from the sciences.'

'Miriam,' Ruth said.

'Miriam,' Eleanor said, and gave the name back without comment, as one gives back a passport at a border. 'She is reading what?'

'Botany.'

'How nice for her. Tea?'

'Thank you.'

Eleanor poured. Her hand was steady on the spout. The tea fell in a thin amber line. Ruth took the cup and the saucer and held the saucer against her palm and felt the heat through the china. She had walked into the room intending to drink the tea standing because standing kept the body alert, and then she had remembered Hannah on the bench at St George's Mall saying *attend the Sunday tea this week* and she had sat.

She sat.

'You are reading classics,' Eleanor said, without making it a question.

'Latin, Greek, ancient history, English.'

'A heavy load for the first year.'

'It is the standard load for a scholarship.'

Eleanor's mouth made a brief private movement that was not quite a smile. 'You answer like a man who has been asked the question before.'

'I have.'

'Yes. I expect you have.' She set her own cup down on the windowsill and looked at Ruth from a height she did not need to construct. 'Professor Arbuthnot is teaching Latin one this year, I think.'

'Yes.'

'My father knew his uncle in Stellenbosch in the twenties. The classics in this country are a tight profession.' She paused. The pause was long enough to be noticed and short enough not to be remarked upon. 'I wanted to ask you something. We are walking the mountain on Saturday. A short party, my brother and a friend of his and Constance and Vivienne, going up Platteklip and down by the cableway. I wondered whether you would come.'

Ruth set her cup down carefully on the low table. The cup was not quite level on the saucer and she made the saucer level and then set it down. The room was not louder than it had been but it had become more attentive. Connie's ankles by the piano had not uncrossed but the angle of her head had altered.

'I have not walked the mountain.'

'No, I gathered. That is why I asked. It is a pleasant walk. Three hours up, an hour at the top, fifteen minutes down by the car. We have a thermos and sandwiches.'

'I would like to come,' Ruth said, and the saying was a calculation made in a fraction of a second and the calculation included Hannah on the bench and the light moving on the water and *attend the Sunday tea this week*. There was no Sunday tea after this one to which the answer would not be the answer it was now. 'Thank you.'

'Saturday at eight, then. The tram from the residence at half past seven gets you to Kloof Nek by quarter to eight. There is a tea-room. We meet there.' Eleanor reached, then, into the leather bag at her hip and withdrew a flat object the size of a deck of cards and the colour of brushed brass. She opened it with one thumb. The inside was tooled gold, the cigarettes laid in a precise overlapping fan. There was an engraved monogram at the inside of the lid that Ruth could not read at the distance. Eleanor took out a cigarette and tapped it on the back of her left hand and closed the case again with the same thumb. She did not light the cigarette. She held it.

'You should wear something warmer than what you have on now,' she said. 'There is wind on the upper slopes even in April.'

'I have an overcoat.'

'A coat is too heavy for the climb. A jersey under your jacket is sufficient.'

'I will wear a jersey.'

'Good.' The cigarette returned to the case. The case returned to the bag. The whole movement had taken perhaps eleven seconds and Ruth had read every second of it. 'I am pleased you can come.'

Not pleasure. The noting of an event.

Vivienne came over from the further table with her own cup. 'Miss MacLeod is joining us on Saturday,' Eleanor said, as Vivienne arrived.

'How lovely,' Vivienne said. Her voice carried the ringing quality of a woman who had been told she had a lovely voice and had practised on the telling. 'Have you walked Platteklip before?'

'No.'

'Oh, you mustn't worry. Hugh always carries the thermos and Robin is the slowest of us. We accommodate the slowest.' She looked sidelong at Eleanor with the private gleam of an ally. 'It is not an athletic event. It is the social meaning of the event that is the event.'

'I see,' Ruth said. She did, and Vivienne saw that she did.

'Good,' said Eleanor.

Connie crossed the room then, her cup empty, and stopped beside Eleanor's chair without sitting. 'Saturday is the day before the Goldsworthy ball,' she said to Eleanor.

'I know.'

'The Sunday after a Saturday on the mountain is rather a great deal of standing.'

'It is for some of us,' Eleanor said, without turning her head. 'Miss MacLeod, you do not happen to be invited to the Goldsworthy ball, I should think.'

'No.'

'You will recover the more easily, then. Constance, would you sit. You are looming.'

Connie sat on the edge of the chair next to Eleanor's, her ankles re-crossing in the new position. She gave Ruth the brief speculative glance that Ruth recognised from the dining hall, the glance that took in the wool dress and the school shoes and the hands that had not been creamed since September. The glance was speculative because Connie was working the calculation and the calculation was not quite resolved. Connie set the cup down on the table between them with a faint chime of china against china that was not quite a sound she had intended.

'You are very kind to invite me,' Ruth said.

'I am not,' said Eleanor. 'I simply believed you would want to see the mountain from the top before the rains start.'

The mountain stood in the upper sash of the window above Eleanor's right shoulder. Its upper face was the colour of dry stone and dust. The southern shoulder caught the late light. The cableway cabin was a distant rectangle on the wire, ascending. Ruth had looked at the mountain every day since January and had not been told until that minute that she would be on it.

She drank the tea.

When she rose to leave the room twenty minutes later, having spoken twice more about nothing, having registered every chair, having calculated her exit, Vivienne was already telling a story to Connie about a girl in their year who had been taken off the books, and Eleanor was at the window again, with the cigarette case in her hand, half open, and the cigarette still unlit. The afternoon light had begun to go.

In the corridor outside the common room, Miss Pryce was speaking to one of the kitchen girls about the linen. She did not turn her head as Ruth passed. She raised one hand slightly in the administrative gesture by which she registered the passing of any girl in her care.

In Room 412 Ruth sat on the bed and did not take off her shoes.

She had agreed to walk up a mountain.

The window had begun to lose the light along the upper line of the residence roofline. The pines in the drive were moving in the same slow dry agreement they had been moving in on Friday evening when she had folded the silk square in her lap. The brown Tibullus was on the desk where she had left it. The folded letter was still inside it at the page of the second elegy.

She had agreed to walk up a mountain because Hannah had told her to attend the Sunday tea. The Sunday tea had brought the mountain. The mountain had been there all along.

She got up and went to the small chest of drawers and opened the second drawer down. Inside the drawer were her two jerseys, neither of them new. She took out the heavier one, the dark grey one her mother had knitted in the year before she left for the convent, and laid it across the foot of the bed. She took off her shoes. She placed the shoes side by side under the chair.

She sat down again on the edge of the bed and looked at the jersey on the counterpane and did not move for some time.

\*

Saturday came up cold.

The tram from the residence to Kloof Nek was empty at twenty past seven of any other woman travelling the mountain road. Ruth sat in the back seat with the jersey on under her tweed jacket and the wool dress under the jersey and her hands inside her coat pockets, and watched Cape Town tilt sideways as the line climbed. The mountain was not yet in sun. The lower slopes were wet from a night of mist. The pines along the road carried the smell of their own resin.

The tea-room at Kloof Nek was a small white wooden building with a tin roof and a verandah. There were two motor cars parked on the gravel and a man in walking boots was standing by the further one, smoking. He was perhaps twenty-three. He was tall and angular and carried himself with the unhurried looseness of a man who had been told from boyhood that the earth was waiting for him to step on it. He looked up as Ruth approached.

'You will be Miss MacLeod,' he said.

'I am.'

'Hugh Stratford-Reid. Eleanor's cousin.' He held out a hand. The hand was warm. 'They are inside arguing about the thermos. Would you go in.'

She went in. The inside of the tea-room was dim and smelled of black tea and paraffin. Eleanor was at a round table with a young man Ruth had not met, both of them turned slightly away from a folded canvas knapsack in the middle of the table. Connie was at the counter paying for sandwiches in greaseproof paper. Vivienne was sitting on the verandah with her ankles crossed and her face turned toward the morning light.

'Ruth,' said Eleanor, looking up. The use of the first name was a marked event. 'This is Robin Hayes-Whittaker. Robin, Miss MacLeod. Robin reads law. Robin is the slowest of us today. He has eaten too much breakfast.'

'I have not,' Robin said amiably. He had a wide good face and an engineering of the mouth that promised to laugh at any reasonable invitation. 'How do you do.'

'How do you do.'

'Eleanor has filled the thermos with what she insists is coffee. I am filing a protest.'

'Sit on it,' Eleanor said. 'We are leaving in three minutes.'

In the event they left in seven. Hugh paid for two more rounds of sandwiches. Connie came out with the parcel of greaseproof and put it into the canvas knapsack on the table and then took the knapsack onto her own shoulders without asking, which Ruth saw Eleanor notice and not remark upon. Vivienne came in from the verandah with her face arranged. They walked out into the gravel and across the road and onto the path through the lower pines and the path was wide enough for two and Eleanor walked beside Robin and Hugh walked beside Vivienne and Connie walked behind with the knapsack and Ruth walked beside Connie because the geometry of six on a path of two had no other arithmetic.

The path went up.

The lower section of Platteklip Gorge is not strictly speaking a climb. It is a long stair of stone and gravel. The angle is steady and the breath has time to lengthen and the city falls away at the right shoulder by degrees. Ruth had not walked anything like it. She had walked the slope behind the Letaba farm as a child and she had walked the road from the convent into Pietersburg, but she had not climbed against gravity for an hour at a stretch and her legs had not been asked the question. She felt the question begin to be asked at twenty minutes. She felt it asked properly at forty.

The party stretched. Robin and Hugh moved ahead. Eleanor and Vivienne were a few yards behind. Connie was steady but slow with the weight, and Ruth was beside Connie, and Connie had not spoken since they entered the path.

'Are you well,' Connie said at fifty minutes, when Ruth had paused without intending to and had set her hand against a boulder to take a breath.

'I am well.'

'It is a different kind of effort from reading.'

'It is.'

'I find it makes the reading easier. The body calms down for a day after.' Connie looked up at the line of the gorge above them, at the steep grey throat of it where the path narrowed to a single file of stone. 'We are nearly through the lower section. The middle is the harder part. The upper is the easier. Eleanor has done it eleven times.'

'You have done it.'

'Six.'

'Six is not nothing.'

'It is not eleven.'

Connie's voice was even. She was not unkind. Her unkindness was already in the calculation she had finished about Ruth and the calculation had nothing to do with the present exchange. She started up again and Ruth followed her and Ruth's left calf had begun a small pulse of warning that she recognised from the corridor.

The middle section of Platteklip is a stone corridor between two walls of rock. At points the stone is wet from a thin seep that comes down the western face all year. The path bends and the angle steepens and the city below disappears for long minutes behind the bend and then reappears. The wind did not enter the corridor. The air in the corridor was still and warm and the warmth was the warmth of a body moving, not of a sun.

Ruth kept her eyes on the path two paces ahead of her boots and counted boots. At a hundred boots she paused. At a hundred more she paused. Connie went ahead. Robin and Hugh were entirely out of sight. Eleanor's voice came down once around a bend, calling something to Vivienne, and Vivienne laughed.

Ruth came round the upper bend of the corridor and the corridor ended and the world opened.

It opened like a cut.

The path debouched onto a wide flat scree at the upper end of the gorge, with the back of the mountain spreading away to the south in a long low plateau of grey rock and dry vegetation, and the city unrolled below to the right at a depth and a distance that Ruth could not, in the first second, accept. The drop along the right edge of the path had no protection. No fence. The upper rim of the gorge fell away in a single grey throat to the city far below, and the city no longer carried the look of a city at the depth she saw it. A flat pattern of streets and roofs.

Her body knew before her mind. Her body had known on the slope behind the Letaba farm as a child, when she had climbed once to a krantz to see whether she could and could not, and her father had come up after her and told her quietly to sit, and she had sat for an hour before she could be carried down. Her body knew now in the same place it had known then, in the region behind the breastbone where the lungs become unreasonable.

She did not move.

The party were a hundred yards across the upper plateau, gathered in a loose group where the path turned south toward the upper cableway station. Hugh was pointing at something. Robin was laughing. Eleanor was looking out toward the sea. Connie had stopped halfway across, the knapsack still on her back, her head turned, and she was watching Ruth.

'Come along, Ruth,' Eleanor called, without turning her head.

Ruth could not.

She could not lift her foot. The foot was not a foot. The foot was a weight that belonged to the rock and the rock belonged to the depth and the depth was not a thing she could think against. The wind, which she had not felt in the corridor, came across the plateau in a low cold drag that pulled at the hem of her coat and then lifted it and dropped it, and the lifting of the hem was the precise wrong sensation, the sensation of being pulled by something larger than her body toward the edge.

She closed her eyes.

She opened them.

The drop was still there. The drop was at the centre of her vision now even when she looked at the path. The path had become a line beside the drop and the line was narrower than it had been a moment ago.

'Ruth,' Eleanor called, more sharply.

Ruth heard the sharpness as if from the bottom of a glass. The sharpness was a piece of information about Eleanor. Eleanor was being looked at by Hugh and Robin and Vivienne and Eleanor required Ruth to move. Ruth understood this in the absolute clarity that her body was now manufacturing in place of motion. Fear had laid its hand on every detail of the plateau and was pressing down. The plateau was being measured. The measurement was very precise. The way the wind moved a particular tuft of grey grass at the lip of the drop. The way the line of the path had a pale wear pattern in its centre where ten thousand boots had ground the stone smoother than the stone beside it. The way Connie's knapsack had a leather buckle at the lower strap that had not been quite done up.

She could not move.

Vivienne's voice came thinly from the further group. 'What is the matter with her.'

'Nothing,' Eleanor said, and the *nothing* was a public correction of Vivienne, not an answer about Ruth. 'She is taking it in.'

'She is not moving.'

'Vivienne.'

Connie had not moved either. Connie was standing in the middle of the plateau with the knapsack on her back, watching Ruth, and the watching was a calculation. Ruth could not at that distance read the calculation. Ruth could read only that Connie had not yet moved toward her and had not yet moved away.

The wind dropped. The hem of her coat went still. The stillness was a small mercy.

She thought, do not look down.

She had been looking down.

She moved her eyes very slowly along the path until the path went into the grey of the plateau and she stopped them there. The drop was at the side of her vision and not the centre. She could keep it at the side. She kept it at the side.

She thought, the foot.

The foot had not changed. The foot was still a weight.

She thought, the other foot. She would move the other foot. The left foot. The left foot was the foot further from the drop. If she moved the left foot first, the drop did not change.

She moved the left foot.

It moved an inch.

She moved it again. It moved an inch.

She did not look at the drop. She did not look at the others. She looked at the wear pattern on the path. The wear pattern had a faint rust mark at one place where someone's boot nail had bled iron into the stone. She looked at the rust mark. She moved the left foot.

The right foot followed.

She had moved twelve inches.

She thought, twelve inches in a minute is sixty feet in an hour. She thought, the plateau is a hundred yards. She thought, the cableway station is three hundred yards. She thought, do not multiply.

She moved the left foot.

Behind her on the path, in the upper bend of the corridor, the wind that had dropped on the plateau was beginning again as a thin sound in the rock. The sound was a thin high whistle. She used the whistle. The whistle was behind her and the whistle was steady and the whistle did not belong to the drop.

Connie was moving.

Connie was walking back toward her across the plateau, the knapsack on her back, the strap she had not done up swinging slightly as she came. She was not hurrying. She was walking at the steady pace of a woman who had decided to come back and had not decided what she would say when she got there.

Ruth moved the left foot. The right foot followed. She had moved two feet.

Connie arrived. She stopped four feet from Ruth, on the path, between Ruth and the further group.

'Ruth.'

Ruth did not look up from the rust mark on the stone.

'I am alright.'

'You are not.'

'I am moving.'

'Yes.' Connie's voice had gone very neutral. The neutrality was a kindness. The neutrality was also an exhibit. Ruth understood, in the same precise place where she had understood the wind, that Connie's neutrality would later be reported. 'May I take your arm.'

'No.'

'You are sure.'

'Yes.'

Connie did not press. She turned her body slightly to put herself between Ruth and the drop, which was the older courtesy a horseman gave to a horse, and stood there. She did not speak again for a minute.

'I would like you to walk in front of me,' Ruth said, after the minute. Her voice came out exact. The voice surprised her by being exact. 'I do not want anyone behind me.'

'Yes,' Connie said.

Connie turned and walked very slowly along the path toward the further group. Ruth followed. She moved the left foot. The right foot followed. The drop was still at the side of her vision. The drop was the same drop. She was moving along beside it. She would move along beside it for as long as the drop was there.

She made the plateau.

She did not look up until she was past the place where the further group had been standing and the path began to descend toward the upper cableway station, and when she looked up the further group were a way ahead, walking, not looking back. Eleanor's fawn coat moved against the grey of the upper rock with a precise rhythm. Hugh's hand was on Vivienne's elbow. Robin was lighting a cigarette in the lee of a boulder.

Connie was a yard ahead of Ruth, walking with the knapsack.

Ruth did not look at the drop again.

\*

At the upper cableway station Eleanor had bought a cup of coffee from the kiosk and was standing at the wall with her cup. She did not turn as Ruth and Connie came up. She did turn after a measured count, and when she turned her face was arranged in the particular composure she used in the dining hall when an under-warden had said something that did not require an answer.

'You are alright,' she said to Ruth.

'Yes.'

'The first time on the upper slopes is sometimes a surprise.'

'Yes.'

'Hugh has tickets for the cabin down. The cabin leaves in eight minutes.'

'Thank you.'

'Constance, you carried the knapsack. I am sorry. I should have taken a turn.'

'It was not heavy,' Connie said.

'Vivienne tells me you helped Ruth up the last of it.'

'A little.'

'Kind of you.'

Connie did not answer. She unbuckled the lower strap of the knapsack with a brief movement and re-did it. Eleanor watched the movement and turned back to her cup.

Ruth went to the wall. The wall was a low parapet of dressed stone built when the cableway had first been put up twenty years before, and it was the first real wall she had seen all morning and her hands took it without instruction. She put her hands flat on the stone. The stone was cold. She pressed her hands down on the cold stone and she stood at the wall and she did not look out.

The cabin came up the wire.

The cabin was a small round metal room with windows on every side. It descended by sliding down the sustaining wire from the upper station to the lower station in seven minutes. There were eleven other people in the cabin and there was a man at the front who operated it with a single brass lever. Ruth went to the centre of the cabin and stood with her back against the central column and she put a hand on the column and did not move from it.

The cabin descended. The cabin swayed in the cross-wind at the second pylon. A girl beside Ruth gave a short laugh of pleasure at the sway. Ruth's hand on the column was the only thing in the cabin that was not pleasure.

At the lower station Ruth got out and walked across the gravel to the road and stood on the road in the sun. Eleanor came out behind her and did not look at her. Hugh came out and lit another cigarette. Robin came out laughing about something.

Connie came out last. Connie set the knapsack down on the gravel and unbuckled the lid and took out the greaseproof parcel of sandwiches and unwrapped them on the lid of the knapsack as though it were a tray.

'There are six,' she said. 'Two cheese, two egg, two ham. Help yourselves.'

They ate the sandwiches on the gravel by the road.

Vivienne came over to Ruth as they ate, and stood beside her, and said, in a voice pitched not quite low enough, 'Are you sure you would not rather sit, Ruth. We could go to the tea-room.'

'I am alright.'

'You looked rather frightened up there.'

'It was the wind.'

'Was it.'

'Yes.'

Vivienne laughed her practised laugh. The laugh meant that Vivienne accepted what Ruth had said as a passable account that she would convert later. 'The wind on the upper plateau is a brute. I cried the first time. Eleanor was unbearable about it for weeks.'

'I am sure.'

Vivienne moved closer and lowered her voice, and the voice when it came out lowered was softer than Ruth had heard it. 'You did very well, you know. Coming back across like that. You did rather better than a number of girls would have done.'

For half a second the softness was real. Ruth could hear that it was real. Vivienne, who had been a polished surface all morning, had said something that came from a less polished place. The surface returned a second later and Vivienne stepped back, and the next thing she said, called over her shoulder to Eleanor, was *Robin has eaten the last egg sandwich* in the calibrated voice of the morning, and the moment was gone.

Ruth filed it. The softness had been there. The softness would be useful later if she remembered exactly that it had occurred.

The tram down was at half past one. Eleanor said her father's car was meeting them at the foot of Kloof Nek and would take them as far as Sea Point and Ruth was welcome to come if she liked, and Ruth said no thank you, the tram would do, and Eleanor said as you wish in the voice that registered the refusal as data. The party walked down the mountain road to the tram stop together and at the tram stop Hugh shook Ruth's hand again and Robin said *Good show, Miss MacLeod*, and Eleanor said *I am pleased you came*, and Connie said nothing and Vivienne said *We must do it again when the rains stop*. The car came. The four of them got into it. Connie got into the back seat and did up the seat belt and did not look at Ruth through the window.

Ruth waited at the tram stop.

The tram came. She got in. She sat in the back seat. The tram descended the mountain road to the city and the city laid itself out as it had when she had ridden up that morning and the city was the same city. The mountain was behind her now. She did not turn to look at it.

She looked at her hands instead. Her hands were on her knees. The knuckles were white. She made the knuckles unwhiten one finger at a time.

\*

In the residence Miss Pryce was in the lower hall when Ruth came in. She was conferring with the head matron about a delivery. She looked up as Ruth crossed the hall.

'Miss MacLeod.'

'Warden.'

'You have been on the mountain.'

'Yes.'

'With Miss Stratford-Reid's party.'

'Yes.'

'I trust the day was a success.'

'Yes, thank you.'

'Good.' Miss Pryce did not say anything else. She nodded once and turned back to the matron, and the conferring continued about the linen, and Ruth went up the stairs.

In Room 412 Ruth took off the tweed jacket and hung it over the back of the chair. She took off the heavy grey jersey and folded it on the bed. She sat on the bed in the wool dress with her hands in her lap.

After some time she got up and went to the desk and opened the brown Tibullus to the page of the second elegy of the third book, and the folded sheet of writing paper was still inside it where she had left it on Friday evening. She took the sheet out. She unfolded it. She read the three lines.

*The window opens. The light may, as you said, be a new tyranny. I am attending Sunday tea this week.*

She took up the pen.

Below the three lines, in the same neat hand, she wrote a fourth.

*I went up the mountain on Saturday and could not move at the top.*

She read the fourth line.

She did not sign the letter.

She folded it again along the same fold and slid it back into the Tibullus at the same page and closed the cover.

She picked up the green silk square from the desk and folded it once on her palm and folded it again and laid it across her knee.

The light along the western wall had gone the colour of clean brass, as it had done on Friday and would do on every clear Sunday evening of the autumn. The mountain was beginning to lose its definition above the residence roofline. The pines along the drive were moving in their slow dry agreement of evening.

She did not light the lamp.

She sat with the square folded on her knee and her hands open on the counterpane and she did not move for a long while, and when she did move, it was only to put her right hand flat against her own breastbone, where the lungs had become unreasonable on the upper plateau, and to leave it there.

The breath was steady.

The breath had been steady, she realised, since the wall at the cableway station.

She kept her hand where it was.