CHAPTER 16

The Uncle at the Beach


I

It was Tuesday and she had missed Hannah.

The tutorial on Catullus 64 had run twenty minutes past its scheduled end because Dr Hofmeyr had got into the wedding of Peleus and Thetis in his slow, unstoppable way and there was no exit door in his sentences. Ruth had watched the long minute hand of the wall clock cross the half-hour and the three-quarter and could do nothing. She had walked from the Arts Block at the half-pace that did not look like running, down through Hiddingh Hall, across Government Avenue under the oaks already beginning to turn, and along Wale Street toward the bus rank at Caledon Square. The bus rank was empty of her. The corner nearest the rank, where Hannah stood for forty minutes every second Tuesday between three and twenty to four, had a man in a dark suit waiting for the next bus and three pigeons and no one she knew. She had walked once around the square in case Hannah had moved to the shaded side, and she had not. The next channel was a fortnight away. She had counted, walking back, the streets in fortnights until June.

She came in through the residence porch at five past five and Mr Davies in the porter's box looked up from his ledger and lifted a folded slip of paper from her pigeonhole.

'Telephone for you at four-thirty, Miss Roth. Lady asked you to ring back as soon as you came in. Number's on the slip. She said it was your aunt.'

She unfolded the slip on the porter's counter. *Mrs A. Lawrence, Oranjezicht 6-7142. Please ring at your convenience.* The handwriting was Davies's, the loops square and patient, and the words *at your convenience* would have been Audrey's. Audrey Lawrence said that even when she meant *now*.

'May I use the telephone, Mr Davies.'

'Of course you may. Step in.'

She stepped into the porter's box. There was just room for the chair and the table and the black handset, and the smell in there was of pipe tobacco and coal dust from the stove and the warm rubber of the cord. Davies turned his back politely and busied himself with the ledger of late returns. Ruth lifted the handset, gave the operator the number, and waited while the line opened.

It opened on a single ring.

'Bellevue.'

'Aunt Audrey. It's Ruth.'

'Ruth.' A small silence at the other end, the sort of silence Audrey Lawrence used when she was assembling a sentence in advance. 'Forgive me for ringing the residence. I wanted to speak to you privately and the College switchboard is not what one would call discreet.'

'Yes.'

'Your uncle has not been home since Sunday afternoon.'

The wall of the porter's box was cream paint over hessian and Ruth saw, in the second she did not speak, the repeating pattern of the weave under the paint and the place above the table where the paint had bubbled and lifted.

'I see.'

'I should explain.' Audrey paused again, and Ruth heard, through the line, the mechanical chatter of someone tapping the receiver mouth lightly with a fingernail, then stopping. 'This is not the first time. He goes off. He always goes to the same place, or near it. He is not in any danger of which I am presently aware. He will, in his own time, come back. It has been three days now and that is towards the longer end of the pattern, and Helen Tindall has gone back to Johannesburg, and there are reasons of which I will not bore you on a residence telephone that I cannot myself go down.' A breath. 'I should be very grateful, Ruth, if you would go down to Muizenberg tomorrow morning and bring him back. Or, if you cannot bring him back, sit with him for an hour and come away. Either is a service. He will be near the pavilion. He has a bench he uses. The further bench past the changing huts on the Sunrise Beach side, towards Vrygrond. You will find him there or in the pavilion tea room. He will not have shaved.'

She made it sound, this last, like a piece of practical information one passed between friends on the matter of mutton at the butcher.

'Yes,' Ruth said. 'I'll go.'

'I shall reimburse the train fare. Davies will be told there has been a family matter.' Another pause, very brief, and then the sentence Audrey could not, even now, prevent herself from saying. 'I am sorry to ask this of you, Ruth.'

'It isn't an imposition, Aunt Audrey.'

'It is an imposition, but you are courteous to call it otherwise. Take the eight-ten from the city. Bring him to the four o'clock if you can. I shall be at the platform end of Cape Town station at half past five with a taxi.'

'Yes.'

'And Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'Thomas does not need a doctor and he does not need a clergyman. He needs an hour of quiet company and a hot meal. If he speaks of the war, do not contradict him. If he speaks of his mother, do not encourage him. If he asks for whisky, say you have none and offer tea. That is all.'

'Yes.'

'Thank you.'

The line closed. She stood for a moment with the handset still at her ear listening to the click and the small dry hum after the click, and then put it carefully back in the cradle and stepped out of the box. Davies was still at his ledger. He did not look up at once. When he did, he had the same quiet face he wore when he handed back a parcel.

'Anything I can do, Miss Roth.'

'I shall be off campus tomorrow until late afternoon. Family.'

'I'll mark you out for the day.' He took up his pen. 'Will you take supper before you go.'

'No, thank you. An early breakfast.'

'I'll tell the kitchen.'

She went up the stairs slowly. On the second-floor landing she met Eleanor Stratford-Reid, who was coming down with two library books pressed against her hip, and Eleanor stopped and looked at her with the close intelligent attention she gave to things she meant to remember and said, 'You look as though you've had news, Roth.'

'Family. It's nothing.'

'If it were nothing you would not have said it was nothing.' Eleanor smiled, the brief courteous smile that meant she would not press. 'Sunday tea, regardless. Bring whatever it is and we shall not speak of it.'

'Thank you, Stratford-Reid.'

Eleanor went on down the stairs. The cigarette case in her cardigan pocket caught the corridor light for a moment and went out.

In Room 412 Ruth sat for a long while at the writing table without lighting the lamp, watching the brass-coloured western light move down the wall to the level of the skirting board. The mountain above the residence roofline lost its definition in the usual way. The pines in the avenue moved in their slow dry agreement. The silk square was folded twice on the corner of the desk where it had been folded for some weeks now. The Tibullus letter lay inside the brown cover, folded, at seven lines. She did not take it out. She took out, instead, the folded map of the suburban railway that had been printed in the back of her *Cape Peninsula Visitor's Guide* of 1947 and traced, with her index finger, the False Bay line from the city through Observatory and Salt River and Mowbray and Rosebank and Rondebosch and Newlands and Claremont and Kenilworth and Wynberg and Plumstead and Diep River and Retreat and Steenberg and Lakeside and the long curve at the edge of the vlei into Muizenberg. It was a journey of about forty minutes. She had not made it before.


II

The eight-ten from Cape Town was a third-class compartment with leather-covered benches and a lavatory at one end whose door swung open and shut on the curves and a window that admitted a thin cold morning air smelling of coal smoke and the salt of the bay. She sat on the seaward side and watched the city give way to the southern suburbs and the southern suburbs give way, after Lakeside, to the long flatness of the vlei and then the sudden brilliant grey-blue of False Bay across the rooftops of Muizenberg. The mountain on the right, on the seaward side, was a wall of dark rock that did not behave like a mountain but like a long shoulder turned to the train. She had not known the Cape did this. The compartment was nearly empty. Two women in housekeeper's coats sat at the far end and conversed in a low Afrikaans she did not try to follow. A man in a brown trilby read the *Cape Times* and turned the pages in a manner that suggested he disapproved of every page in the paper equally.

She got down at Muizenberg station onto a platform of weathered timber and white-painted iron. The station had the look of a building that had been cherished once and was now being permitted to age. The sign above the platform office read MUIZENBERG / EUROPEAN BOOKING OFFICE in white enamel letters on dark blue ground, and a man in a stained municipal jacket was on a wooden trestle painting the lower edge of the sign where the salt had eaten the paint. He worked slowly. He was using a brush of the kind one used on doors. He did not look at her as she passed under the sign.

The walk from the station to the beach was a short walk down a sloping street smelling of fish and tar and a baker's. The pavilion presented itself at the end of the street, white in the morning sun, art deco, its arches and its balconies looking like a building that had been imagined for somewhere larger and then set down here. The tide was out. The sand stretched a long way to a thin grey line of surf. The colourful changing huts ran in a row above the high-water mark, their red and blue and yellow doors closed and shuttered at this hour and at this season. The beach was almost empty. A man was walking a dog at the water's edge. A woman in a dark coat was sitting on the wall with her face to the sun. A boy of perhaps ten was running along the sand with a stick, drawing a long line behind him, then stopping and looking at the line as if it were proof of something.

She walked along the pavilion side toward the further bench Audrey had named, past the changing huts and the kiosk that was shut, toward the Sunrise Beach end. The further bench was a wooden bench with cast-iron ends, the wood weathered to a silvered grey, set facing the sea on a concrete apron above the sand. There was a man on it.

She slowed.

He was in the tweed jacket she had seen at Bellevue and a grey wool overcoat she had not seen before, the overcoat collar turned up, his hat in his lap. He was sitting upright with both feet flat on the concrete and his hands in the pockets of the overcoat. His hair, which at Bellevue had been close and clean, was longer at the back of the neck than a barber would have left it. He had not shaved in three days. The light off the sea fell on the side of his face that was turned to her and she could see, even at thirty paces, the silver in the stubble.

She stopped and considered. Audrey had said *go and sit with him.* She had not said *announce yourself.* She walked the last twenty paces along the front of the bench, slowly, in his line of sight, so that he would have time, and stopped a little to one side and said, 'Uncle Thomas.'

He looked up. His eyes took a second to find her and a further second to attach a name to the face. When the name came, he smiled, the courteous smile she had seen on the Saturday at Bellevue.

'Ruth.'

'May I sit.'

'You may.'

She sat. There was the bench between them, the silvered wood under her hand cold from the night, the overcoat warm where his shoulder gave a little against the wind. He did not ask her how she had come to be at Muizenberg on a Wednesday morning. He turned his face back to the sea.

For some minutes neither of them spoke. The sea was a long, unhurried movement of grey and silver under a high pale sky, and the line of surf moved in and broke and moved in and broke, and a gull went over very high. Ruth's hands were cold inside her gloves. She put them in her coat pockets. The bench was at a place where the sand fell away to a low concrete step and beyond the step the beach, and beyond the beach the bay, and beyond the bay the long line of the Helderberg and the Hottentots Holland mountains, hazy in the morning. It was the largest visible quietness she had ever sat inside.

'Audrey rang you,' he said eventually. He said it as a statement.

'Yes.'

'I thought she might. I had given it three days. She gives it three days as a rule.' He spoke quietly, evenly, with no audible self-pity. 'I am sorry to have made you a courier, Ruth. It was not in your terms when you came to study.'

'I was glad to come.'

'You were not glad to come. You were prepared to come. Those are different things and I prefer the second from a niece.'

She did not answer. He said, after a moment, 'You will find, when you have lived a bit longer, that the people who are useful are the ones who know the difference. Audrey is not always one of them. She is, however, always a person who rings. That is its own form of love.'

'Yes.'

'Have you eaten.'

'I had toast at the residence.'

'Then you have not eaten. The pavilion tea room opens at ten. We will go in at ten and you will eat a proper breakfast and I will have tea. I will permit you to buy the tea, since Audrey is reimbursing you, and that means I am, in a manner of speaking, paying my own bill.' He turned his face from the sea for the first time and looked at her properly. His eyes were the same intelligent, slightly amused eyes she had seen at Bellevue. They were very tired. 'Will that suit.'

'That will suit.'

'Good.'

He turned back to the sea. After a moment he said, in the same even voice, 'I came down on Sunday afternoon on the four-fifteen. I had not planned it. I left the house after lunch saying I was walking down to the Shellhole. I walked to the bottom of Hof Street and along Government Avenue and through the gardens to the station and bought a return to Muizenberg and have not used the return half. I have slept in the boarding house behind the changing huts. The proprietress is Mrs Daly and she is accustomed to me and asks no questions. I have been here three days. I have walked along the beach. I have read part of a book. I have not spoken to anyone except Mrs Daly and the man at the kiosk on Monday and the woman who sells the *Cape Times* at the station, and now you.'

'Yes.'

'You are not asking me why.'

'No.'

'That is wise of you. There is no why. Or there is, but it is not the kind of why one explains in a sentence to a niece on a bench in Muizenberg on a Wednesday morning. It is more like a barometer. The air in the house at a certain pressure becomes, for me, unbreathable, and I come down here, where the air has a different pressure, and after some days I can breathe again and I go back. It is no more interesting than that. I have made the decision once not to make it interesting. Audrey understands. She has agreed not to require it to be interesting. The arrangement works for us.'

He stopped and watched the surf. Then he said, more quietly, 'I am sorry that you were sent.'

'I do not mind being sent.'

'You may not now. You will, later, mind it a little. I only wish to apologise in advance for the part of you that will mind.'

She looked sideways at him. He was watching the line of the breakers. The line moved and broke and moved and broke, and a fishing boat came round the point at St James very slowly, with the high stern and the low bow of a False Bay snoek boat, and went on past Muizenberg toward Strandfontein. He watched it the whole way.

'Uncle.'

'Yes.'

'I left Aunt Lena's house in November. I had been there since I was six. I left without telling her where I was going and I have not, since I left, written to her. I had thought, before I came down here this morning, that I had made my own decision in that. I am less sure now that I came on the train, sitting beside the bay, that the decision was the kind one makes. I think it may be the kind one falls into. I do not know whether that is the same as what you describe. I think it may be a smaller version of it.'

He did not answer for some time. Then he said, 'It is not a smaller version. It is the same thing. It happens early in the people who are clever. It happens later in the people who are not.'

'I see.'

'You may also find,' he said, 'that one does not entirely come back. Audrey expects me to come back, and I do come back, in the sense that I return to the house in Hof Street on Wednesday or Thursday and have my hair cut on the Friday and on the Saturday afternoon I am in the drawing room with a sherry, and that is a return of a kind. But the part of me that came down here on the four-fifteen on Sunday is still down here. It is sitting, in fact, on this bench. It will be sitting on this bench when I am at the next sherry party at Bellevue. That is what one means by the word *drift*. It is not the body that drifts. It is the proportion of oneself that one has stopped requiring to be in the room.'

She did not answer at once. The sea continued. After a moment she said, 'Yes.'

'Yes,' he said.

A municipal worker in a stained jacket and a dark cap had appeared at the kiosk end of the front and was carrying a white-painted board and a coil of wire. He set the board against the side of the kiosk and produced a pair of pliers. The board, when he turned it once to look at it, read on its painted side EUROPEANS ONLY / SLEGS BLANKES in black enamel letters on white. He did not look at the bench. He took down an older sign from the kiosk wall, the older sign that had said the same thing in a more weathered paint, and put up the new one and wired it. He did the work in about two minutes. He picked up the older sign, looked at it once, and walked off with it under his arm in the direction of the further changing huts. He did not look back.

Thomas had been watching him. He did not move. He said, 'They are renewing them this autumn. They began in March. They are doing all the False Bay stations and the pavilions. The Fish Hoek pavilion was done in February. The Kalk Bay sign at the harbour was done in March. The St James boxes were done last week. They are being more thorough than they were before. It is not legislation. It is a tone.'

'Yes.'

'There has been a tone since June. The new government has been in for ten months and the tone has firmed.'

'Yes.'

'Your aunt will not discuss it. The Penn-Carterets will not discuss it. Helen Tindall would discuss it but she has gone to Johannesburg.' He paused. 'Your friend the German woman, Hannah, would discuss it. Audrey said you walk in the District with her on Tuesdays. I am glad of it. You should keep up the walks.'

The wind off the bay had freshened a little. Ruth held her coat collar at her throat with one gloved hand. The municipal worker had come back from the changing huts without the older sign. He was now at the further end, at the bench end, with another white board.

He came along the front toward them. He stopped about ten paces short of the bench and considered. Then he set the board against the cast iron end of the next bench down, fifty paces toward Sunrise Beach, and produced the pliers and began to wire it.

This board read SLEGS BLANKES / EUROPEANS ONLY in the same black enamel letters on white, and below the letters, in slightly smaller type, *Per order: Municipality of Cape Town*.

Thomas watched him. He did not speak until the man was finished and had stepped back to look at his work and had turned and gone back toward the kiosk. Then he said, 'That bench, until this morning, did not have a sign.'

'No.'

'It does now.'

'Yes.'

'Do you understand what that is.'

'I understand what it is.'

'Tell me what it is. I should like to hear it from you.'

She thought for a moment. The wind moved her hair against her cheek. She said, 'It is a sign on a bench by the sea, that until this morning was a bench by the sea.'

He was quiet for a long while. Then he said, very quietly, 'Yes. That is what it is.'

He stood up. He put his hat on. He held out a hand to her and she took it and stood up. He kept her hand, briefly, in the formal way he might have kept the hand of a junior officer's wife at a function, and then released it.

'Tea,' he said. 'And whatever the pavilion tea room can do for you in the way of egg.'


III

The pavilion tea room was a long room with white tiled walls and small round tables and a counter behind which a woman in a green apron was setting out scones under glass. It had the smell of warm milk and fresh bread and the faint marine cold that the pavilion never quite lost. There were three other people in the room, all elderly, all reading. The woman at the counter knew Thomas. She nodded to him as one nods to a fixture and did not speak.

Ruth bought a pot of tea for two and a plate of two boiled eggs and brown bread and butter, and they sat at a table in the corner that gave them the long window onto the sea. Thomas drank the tea black. He ate, when she offered, a small piece of the brown bread, slowly, as a man eats who is not very interested in food but is willing not to alarm a niece. He did not eat the egg. She ate both eggs because she had had only toast and she had not, until she sat down at the table, known how cold the bench had been. The pot was warm under her hand. Outside, the line of the breakers had not changed. Inside, the brief clatter of the woman setting out cups for the day's first proper sitting was the kindest sound she had heard since the porter's box.

He did not speak in the tea room. She did not require him to. After perhaps half an hour he set down his cup and said, 'Right.' He stood. He paid the woman at the counter from a wallet that had two notes in it and the change of which he refused. He walked Ruth back along the front to the station as a man walks who has had his shoes shined that morning, although his shoes had not been shined that morning. They walked at her pace.

At the station he went to the booking office and bought a single second-class to Cape Town. He had, he said, used the return half of his Sunday ticket on Monday morning to come down from Mrs Daly's to the kiosk for a paper and back, and could not now, in good conscience, present it again. He produced this fact with the dry humour of a man who had spent a long time inside the protocols of a regiment.

They sat on the platform on a bench that had a sign on it, painted the autumn before. They did not discuss the sign. The platform sloped toward the seaward end and at the seaward end stood a Coloured woman in a brown coat with a small girl of perhaps six holding her hand and a paper parcel under her other arm. They were the only people at that end of the platform. There was no sign at that end. There did not need to be. Everyone knew where to stand.

The train came in. Ruth got into the compartment first and Thomas after her. The compartment was empty. He took the seaward window. She took the seat opposite. The train pulled out of Muizenberg and ran along the curve at the edge of the vlei and through Lakeside and Steenberg and Retreat. Thomas watched the bay leave them. He did not speak from Muizenberg to Salt River. His face, in profile against the morning light, was the face of a man who had set down something at the bench at the pavilion that he was not certain he had brought with him as far as Wynberg.

At Salt River the compartment filled with men in overalls coming off the morning shift at the railway works. The carriage smelled of axle grease and tobacco. Thomas sat very still and let the men talk over and around him as if they were weather, and they talked over and around him in the same way, with the courtesy of working men toward a man in a tweed jacket they did not understand the presence of. He nodded once, briefly, when one of the men gave up his seat to a woman with a basket. The man took the nod for what it was, returned it, and turned away to his fellows.

At Cape Town station the platform was the wide echoing platform of a Wednesday afternoon and Audrey Lawrence was standing at the end of it in a navy coat and a pair of brown gloves with a black taxi behind her at the rank. She did not move forward when the compartment door opened. She stood at the platform end and waited for them to come to her.

When Thomas was within five paces of her she said, 'Thomas.'

'Audrey.'

'I have a taxi. I have asked the driver to take us by Bellevue. Mrs Robertson has a bath drawn and a meal.'

'Yes.'

She looked then at Ruth. Her face had its composed administration on it, and her eyes, which had spent three days without sleeping properly, did not leave Ruth's. She said, 'Thank you, Ruth.'

'It was not anything, Aunt Audrey.'

'It was a very great deal. I shall not embarrass you by saying how much. Will you come back to Bellevue with us. Mrs Robertson would be glad to give you a meal.'

'Thank you. I should rather go up to the residence. I have a tutorial in the morning.'

'Of course.' Audrey reached into her coat pocket and produced a folded note. 'For the train. And a little over, for whatever it cost you in time.'

'It cost me nothing.'

'Take it, Ruth. I shall feel better.'

She took it. Audrey held her gaze a moment longer.

'I shall ring you on Friday at the porter's box at six. If the porter has not heard from me by quarter past, you may assume I have been prevented and we shall speak the following week.'

'Yes.'

Audrey turned. She put a hand under Thomas's elbow in the way a woman puts a hand under the elbow of an elderly cousin at a wedding, and walked him to the taxi. The driver opened the door. Thomas got in. Audrey turned at the kerb and lifted a gloved hand once to Ruth and got in after him. The taxi pulled out into Adderley Street and went up Wale Street toward Oranjezicht and was gone in the four o'clock traffic.

Ruth stood for some minutes on the platform end. The note Audrey had given her was a folded one-pound note, which was rather more than the train fare and the tea. She put it in the inside pocket of her coat.

She walked up through the gardens to the residence. The oaks in Government Avenue were turning a deeper bronze than they had been on the Tuesday and the pigeons had moved off the pavement to the lower branches. She walked at the pace of a person who has carried something a long way and is laying it down very slowly.

In Room 412 she did not light the lamp. She took off her coat and laid it across the back of the chair. The salt of the morning was on the cuff and the hem. She took off her gloves and laid them on the desk. The pound note went into the tin she kept inside the third drawer where the few pieces of money she did not bank lived.

She sat at the desk. The brass-coloured western light was on the wall above the skirting board, in the place it had been on the Tuesday afternoon and on the Saturday afternoon and on the Friday afternoon and on every afternoon she had, in the past six weeks, sat at this desk and watched the light. The mountain above the residence roofline lost its definition. The pines moved in their slow dry agreement of the evening.

She took the silk square out of the drawer and unfolded it, for the first time since November, on the surface of the desk. It was smaller, unfolded, than she had remembered, and its green was a different green, a more underwater green, than it had been when folded. She put her hand flat on it. The silk was cool.

She took out the Tibullus. She unfolded the letter inside. She added an eighth line. She did not sign it. She folded it again, at Tibullus 3.2, and closed the brown cover.

She did not open the Greek Anthology. It sat on the right corner of the desk where the porter had left it on the Saturday. She put her hand on the cover, briefly, and took it away.

She thought about the bench at the pavilion and the sign that, until this morning, had not been on it. She thought about the woman and the girl at the seaward end of the platform. She thought about Thomas at Cape Town station walking to Audrey at the taxi at her pace.

She thought about Lena at the kneading board in the kitchen at the farm. She had never, in six weeks at this desk, allowed Lena into the room at evening. Lena had been a morning thought, brisk, dispatched, gone. She allowed her in now. Lena stood at the kneading board and turned and looked at her without surprise and went on with the kneading. Ruth held the look. The silk square was cool under her other hand. The light went out of the room slowly.

She did not light the lamp. She did not, for the first time in six weeks, fold the silk square back into the drawer at the moment the light went. She left it open on the desk under her hand.
