CHAPTER 22

The Shawl


I

She knew the room before she opened her eyes by the smell of carbolic and lavender and by the small distant sound of a kettle being lifted from a range somewhere below the floor.

She did not open her eyes. She lay with her eyes closed and her body very still and she let the room come up around her in its component parts: the cool of a clean cotton sheet against her left arm; the small sustained ache at the lower right of her back where the surgical wound had been dressed; the weight of a thin wool blanket across her hips; the pillow the wrong shape under the back of her head; the dryness in her mouth that she could feel even before she had registered the rest. The pillow was not the residence pillow. The blanket was not the residence blanket. The sheet was not the residence sheet. She knew this without opening her eyes. The room was not the residence.

She opened her eyes.

The ceiling above her was a pressed-tin ceiling painted cream, the patterns of the pressing very faded, with a single brass-mounted electric pendant hanging at the centre on a long flex. The light was off. The light in the room was the slanted afternoon light of a north-facing window with a lace half-curtain across the lower sash. The window was open six inches at the top. The room smelt of carbolic and of an old lavender wardrobe and of the faint sweet medical scent of what she would later understand had been the chloroform of the Tuesday morning surgery.

She turned her head against the pillow.

There was a wooden chair against the far wall under the window. The chair had a high back and a worn cushion of rubbed brown velvet. On the chair was a folded shawl in dark wool, the wool the colour of damp bottlebrush bark, the fold deep and even, the long fringe at one edge tucked under itself in the way her grandmother had taught her grandmother's daughters to fold a shawl that would not be put on again that day.

She knew the shawl before she had registered the woman.

She turned her eyes the small fraction further that brought the chair fully into her field of sight, and her mother was sitting on the chair against the wall under the window with her hands in her lap and her grey hair pinned at the back of her head with the same two pins she had used on every morning of Ruth's life and the dark cotton dress she had worn at the kitchen range on the morning Ruth had left Letaba, and Lena was looking at the floor at a point about six inches in front of her own boots and was not looking at the bed.

Ruth tried to speak.

The sound that came out was a sound that had nothing of the words she had wanted to say. It was a dry small sound at the back of her throat that did not carry past the foot of the bed.

Lena stood up.

She crossed the room to the bedside. She put her hand on the back of Ruth's head and lifted Ruth's head from the pillow with the practised steady support of a woman who had lifted children's heads from pillows for thirty years, and with her other hand she took the small enamel cup of water from the bedside table and held it to Ruth's lips. Ruth drank. The water was cool and faintly metallic from the cup. She drank in the small sips Lena's tilting of the cup permitted. When she had drunk what Lena had decided was the right amount Lena withdrew the cup and lowered Ruth's head back onto the pillow and went back to the chair and sat down and put her hands in her lap and looked at the floor at a point about six inches in front of her own boots.

Ruth lay with the water in her mouth and said nothing.


II

The doctor came in at four.

He was a tall man of perhaps fifty in shirtsleeves and a starched grey waistcoat, his pocket watch on a heavy gold chain across the front of the waistcoat, his hands soaped and dried recently and smelling of the carbolic that scented the whole house. He came in without knocking. His name was Doctor Hayes-Whittaker. Ruth knew his name because she had heard it in another room earlier, perhaps the day before, perhaps on the morning of the surgery, perhaps in some other moment she could not now anchor.

'Mrs MacLeod.'

'Doctor.'

He came round to the side of the bed. He took Ruth's wrist in his fingers and counted her pulse against the pocket watch. He laid her hand back on the sheet. He looked at her face.

'Miss MacLeod.'

'Yes.' The *yes* came out as a shape rather than a sound.

'Good. You are with us. Do not try to speak. The kidney is gone. The other kidney is awake. We will feed you water in cups every twenty minutes for the next two days and we will see what the urine tells us by the Friday. The pain at the lower back is the wound. The wound is dressed. The dressing will be changed at six. There is no fever this afternoon. There was a fever on the Wednesday and the Thursday. You do not remember the Wednesday and the Thursday. That is correct. You are not meant to. Your brother is in the front room. Your mother is here. Your friend Judith Cohen has been here for parts of every day since the Tuesday but is at present at her father's house in Sea Point. You are not, today, in any danger that the next two days will not settle.'

'Yes.'

'I will be in this house tonight. My wife will bring up your supper at six. Mrs MacLeod is sitting with you. She has been sitting with you since the Wednesday afternoon when she came down on the train. She will give you the water until the morning. We do not need a nurse for what we are doing. My wife and I are upstairs.'

'Yes.'

He turned to Lena.

'Mrs MacLeod. Every twenty minutes. Half a cup. She is to swallow without effort. If she will not swallow, do not press her. Tell my wife at the bell. I will be down.'

'Yes, Doctor.'

Lena said it in the slow even Afrikaans of a woman who had answered a doctor on a farm for thirty years. The doctor inclined his head once and went out.

The room settled into the small clean afternoon sound of the house: the distant kettle, the slow turning of a mantel clock somewhere on a lower floor, the wind in a low oak in the front garden, the occasional movement of feet on the upstairs floor. Ruth lay in the bed. Lena sat on the chair. The shawl was folded on the seat of the chair behind her, the dark wool catching the slow afternoon light.


III

Pa came in at half past four.

He was in the suit he had worn at the Pietersburg railway station on the Wednesday evening when he had brought Lena onto the inland train. The suit was creased in the way of clothes that had been slept in on the long journey south. His face was thinner than Ruth had seen it at the kitchen door at Letaba in June. He came round to the side of the bed with the heavy quiet tread he had always had. He sat on the wooden stool the doctor's wife had set against the wall. He did not look at Lena. Lena did not look at him.

'Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'Do not speak. I shall tell you what you need to know. You will sleep again in an hour and you will not, when you wake, remember what I have told you with the clarity that you will think you have. So do not try to fix it. I shall tell you again tomorrow. I shall tell you every day for as many days as it takes.'

'Yes.'

'You crossed the line at the Wynberg level crossing on the Tuesday morning at half past nine. The lower line was clear. The upper line had a goods train coming up that you did not see. You had crossed the lower track and had stopped on the gravel between the lines and were turning to look back at someone behind you. Your boot caught in the rail of the upper line. The rail at that point sits proud of the gravel. You went down. The train was not at any speed because of the platform two hundred yards on. The footboard of the second carriage caught you at the lower right of the back as you were trying to lift the boot free. The boot came free at the same second. You did not go under. You came across with the carriage and went down on the gravel three yards off the line. The man behind you carried you off the line. The train went on to the platform and stopped. The constable at the platform telegraphed the doctor here and they brought you up in the doctor's brougham within the hour.'

'Yes.'

'Doctor Hayes-Whittaker took the right kidney out at midday on the Tuesday. The kidney was beyond saving. The left kidney did not wake at first. He thought we would lose you on the Wednesday morning. He spent the Wednesday morning at the bedside with cups of water at the lip and made his wife and Judith do it through the day. The kidney woke on the Wednesday afternoon. The fever broke on the Thursday night. You are alive because of the water, Ruth. The kidney woke because the doctor would not stop putting the water in.'

'Yes.'

'Boet had the doctor's telegram from the constable at Wynberg on the Tuesday afternoon. He drove up to the school at Merensky and fetched me out of the upper standard four. He drove me back to the farm. I told Lena in three sentences. She put on her coat and she put two dresses in a small canvas bag and she put her grandmother's shawl on top of the dresses and she said she was ready. Boet drove us into Pietersburg in the afternoon. We were on the inland train at half past five. We were at Park Station Johannesburg on the Wednesday morning. We were on the Cape train at five on the Wednesday night. We have been here since the Wednesday late. Boet came down with us as far as Pietersburg and then went back to the farm to be with Anna and Willi for the Tuesday and Wednesday nights and then came down to the Cape on the Thursday morning train. He has been at the boarding house in the upper city. He comes to the doctor's front room every morning at nine to see what Doctor Hayes-Whittaker has to say about you. He goes back to the farm at the end of the week. Anna and Willi are at the farm with Mr van Rensburg's wife sleeping in the kitchen for the nights. The Pietersburg doctor will look in on Anna twice this week. Anna has been told. Anna sends you the message that she is reading the books and that you are to come back to Letaba when the doctor here will let you, which I have said will be in October at the soonest. Anna says October will do.'

'Yes.'

'Catherine MacLeod telephoned the doctor's house yesterday afternoon. She wanted to come down to be useful. Lena said no. Lena said that Catherine should write but should not come. Catherine wrote a card and the card is on the dresser in the front hall. I shall read it to you tomorrow.'

'Yes.'

'Judith Cohen has been here every day. She brought a basket of tea and a basket of bread and she sat in the doctor's front room from four to six on the Tuesday and the Wednesday and the Thursday and read aloud from a book of Latin verses you had lent her in the autumn. The doctor's wife liked her. Lena did not speak to her. Judith did not press it. That is how it has been. That is what the room has been.'

He stopped.

He looked at Ruth's face. He took her hand in his, the long careful hand of a teacher who had marked a great deal of paper for thirty years and whose fingers carried the small permanent ink stain at the side of the second finger that Ruth had known since she had been three and could see his hand.

'Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'You did not die. That is the only thing the day has to say. You can take all the rest in your own time. You did not die.'

He let her hand go. He stood up. He inclined his head once to Lena. Lena did not look up from the floor at the point six inches in front of her boots. Pa went out of the room and closed the door behind him.

The clock on the lower floor struck five.

Lena got up from the chair. She came to the bedside. She put her hand under the back of Ruth's head and lifted Ruth's head from the pillow and held the enamel cup of water to Ruth's lips. Ruth drank. Lena withdrew the cup, lowered Ruth's head, went back to the chair. She sat down. She put her hands in her lap. She looked at the floor at the point six inches in front of her boots.


IV

The light moved up the wall above the bed in the slow careful way the light had moved up the wall above her bed at Letaba every June evening of her childhood and every August evening that the August had been clear.

Ruth lay watching the light.

She watched the shawl on the chair. The shawl was the shawl her mother had worn on every cold morning at the farm Ruth could remember. The shawl was older than Ruth. The shawl had been her grandmother's shawl, the dark wool worked in the long deliberate stitching her grandmother had been known for in the lower farms of the Soutpansberg where her grandmother had lived and worked until 1929. The shawl had come down through her mother's hands from her grandmother's hands. The shawl had been folded for the journey south on the Wednesday morning at the farm and had been carried in her mother's small canvas bag and had been brought into this room on the Wednesday night and had been folded onto the chair and had not been worn at the bedside, because to wear it at the bedside would have been to claim a use of the body that the silence forbade.

Ruth looked at the shawl. Then she looked at Lena.

Lena was not looking at her.

'Ma.'

The word came out clearer than the words at the morning had come out. The cups of water through the day had returned the throat to a thing that could form a word.

Lena did not look up.

'Ma, I know you came.'

Lena did not look up.

'Ma. I know what it cost you to be on the train. I know Boet drove you in to Pietersburg and Pa got you onto the train. I know you have been sitting in this chair for four days. I know it is your hands that have been at the cup every twenty minutes. The doctor said the kidney woke because of the water. The kidney woke because of the water in your hands. I know.'

Lena did not look up.

Ruth lay against the pillow in the slow afternoon light and looked at the woman in the dark cotton dress on the chair against the wall. She felt, in the place inside her chest where her body had been holding the dread of dying for four days she had not known, a stillness that was not relief.

She understood, with the kind of understanding that arrives in the body before it arrives in the mind, that the cup and the look were the same act. The cup was what her mother could give. The look was what her mother could not. The cup had been given for ninety-six hours without pause and the giving had been the saving and the saving had been the love and the love had been done with hands and a tilted enamel rim and the slow careful support of a woman who had lifted children's heads from pillows for thirty years. The look had not been on the table for ninety-six hours and would not be on the table now. Either she would have one or she would have neither. She would not have both. The one she had was the larger one. It had been paid out of the smaller.

'Ma. Then look at me.'

Lena raised her face.

She raised it as far as the foot of the bed. Her eyes moved up the line of the white sheet from the foot of the bed and reached the place where Ruth's hands lay on the cover and stopped at the place where Ruth's hands lay on the cover, and then her eyes moved away to the window, to the lace half-curtain across the lower sash, to the slanted afternoon light on the brass-mounted pendant that hung dark from the centre of the pressed-tin ceiling. Her eyes did not reach Ruth's face. They moved away from the white of the sheet to the lace of the curtain and they stayed at the lace of the curtain.

Something inside Ruth ceased its labour.

She did not weep. She did not turn her face. She lay against the pillow and watched the slanted afternoon light on the lace half-curtain that her mother was watching, and she lay there for the length of time it took the light to move from the upper hem of the lace to the lower hem of the lace, and her mother sat with her hands in her lap and did not look back at the bed, and the shawl was folded on the chair behind her, and the room was as quiet as a room at sundown is when the wind has gone off the slope and the kettles have stopped on the lower floor and the day has decided what it has decided.


V

The clock on the lower floor struck the half hour.

The doctor's wife came up at twenty to six with a covered dish on a tray. She set the tray on the small table beside the bed. She said good evening to Mrs MacLeod and good evening to Miss MacLeod. She uncovered the dish. There was a cup of beef tea and a small white roll and a pat of butter on a saucer. She said the doctor would change the dressing at half past. She said Mrs MacLeod might like to come downstairs to the front room for half an hour while the doctor was with Miss MacLeod. Lena did not answer. The doctor's wife did not press it. She went out.

Lena rose. She came to the bedside. She put her hand under the back of Ruth's head and lifted Ruth's head from the pillow and held the enamel cup of water to Ruth's lips. Ruth drank.

When the cup was lowered Ruth said one more thing into the room, in the small even register that the cups of water had given her.

'Ma. Did you bring the shawl for me, or did you bring it for yourself.'

It was not a question that wanted an answer.

It was a question to which there was an answer, and the answer was something Ruth could carry the rest of her life or could not carry, depending on whether her mother could be the one who said it.

She waited.

The light on the lace half-curtain moved another inch.

The doctor came up the stairs. The wood of the stair-tread spoke under his boot. The clock on the lower floor began to strike the hour.

No one answered.
