CHAPTER 23

What Remains of Family


I

She did not come on a Sunday this time.

She came on a Wednesday in early April of 1950, the Wednesday of the Easter holiday week so that Pa would be at the farm and not at the school, with the second train of the week, the one that took the connection through Pretoria for the night and arrived in Pietersburg at half past nine in the morning instead of after midnight. She had written to Pa ten days before to say she was coming. She had not written to anyone else. Pa had telegraphed back the date and the time and the words STAY THE NIGHT WITH ME, which Ruth had read in the Cape Town residence on the Monday and had folded and put with the Catherine letter that now lived in the inside pocket of her coat alongside the silk square Judith had given her in March of the previous year and the small folded card from Doctor Hayes-Whittaker that had been in the same pocket since the Tuesday morning of the August he had taken her right kidney out.

She came up the road from the Politsi turn-off the way she had come in June.

The April morning of the lowveld was a different morning from the June morning. The air at this hour was warmer than the June dawn had been; the bottlebrushes along the verges showed the deep red of full late autumn rather than the early red of the first cold; the mist was thinner across the valley; the escarpment was already in light. She walked the eight miles down to the gate at the steady pace she had walked it at twenty and at fifteen and at ten. She had been told by Doctor Hayes-Whittaker that she could walk eight miles on a level road in autumn light. She walked it. The body that had survived the Tuesday morning at the Wynberg crossing in the August walked the eight miles down to the gate of Letaba in April of 1950 without protest.

She reached the gate at twenty past nine.

The gate was the same gate. The chain over the post. The lock not closed. The 1939 stone in the dust under the gatepost. She stood at the gate for the count of three breaths. Then she lifted the chain off and pushed the gate open, and she walked through, and she let the gate swing to behind her on the small stone, and the gate did not swing back.

She did not walk up the drive between the avocado trees toward the house.

She turned left along the inside of the lower fence and walked across the patch of dry grass between the fence and the lower paddock to the side of the house, and round the side of the house to the front of the stoep where Anna would be in the morning sun.


II

Anna was on the wicker chair in the autumn sun, in a cardigan over her shoulders and a rug across her knees, the cat at her feet. She did not turn her face when Ruth came up the stoep step.

She knew it was Ruth.

'You came in April.'

'I said I would.'

'You said September.'

'I said I would send the train fare in September. The train fare came. You did not.'

'No. I did not. The chest was bad in the September. Doctor Caldwell would not let me come down then. Pa said the doctor knew best. By the time the chest was good again in October it was too late in the term. I was glad of the train fare though. Pa put it in the post office account in my name. I have one pound four and ninepence of it left.'

'Anna.'

'Ruth. I am eleven. I will be twelve in October. The chest is the chest. The seizures are the seizures. April is good for me. May is good for me. June will not be good for me. By the August I will be back in the wicker chair with the brown blanket. You know all of this. Sit down.'

Ruth sat on the stoep step beside the wicker chair. She took Anna's hand. The hand was the same hand. Thinner than at the June. No thinner than at the previous April. No different from how it would always be.

'How are you,' Anna said.

'I am here.'

'No. How are you. The kidney.'

'The kidney has woken. It has been awake since the Wednesday in August it woke. Doctor Hayes-Whittaker is satisfied. I drink twelve cups of water a day. I do not run. I walk. I came up the road from the Politsi turn-off this morning. I was not winded.'

'Good.'

'I can come up to the house, Anna. I can sit in the kitchen for ten minutes.'

'No.'

'Ma is in the kitchen.'

'Yes. Ma is in the kitchen. Ma is at the table with the basin and the spoon. Ma will not come out and Ma will not look out and Ma will not call. You may go in. I am not going to tell you not to. But I am also going to say that Ma has not changed. The thing that was said in June has not been unsaid. You know the difference between the saving and the looking. You learnt it in August. The August did not teach Ma anything. The August taught you.'

She turned her face toward Ruth then. The dark grey eyes were level. Anna had grown thin but she was still Anna. The small scar at the corner of the lower lip was the same small scar.

'You came to see Pa.'

'I came to see you.'

'You also came to see Pa.'

'Yes.'

'Go to him at the shed. The school is on the Easter break this week and he has had the tractor pump in pieces since Monday. He will be at it until Saturday. He has put the kettle on the spirit ring in the shed. He knows you are here. He saw you at the gate from the lower paddock window of the shed and he came back to the bench to put the kettle on. Boet is up at the upper paddock with Willi at the syndicate man's lorry. They will be down at the noon. Go.'

Ruth held the hand. She bent and kissed Anna once on the temple. Anna did not turn her face.

'Anna. The doctor in Pietersburg.'

'Doctor Caldwell is the doctor. Doctor Caldwell is the doctor who has known me since I was four and Doctor Caldwell will be the doctor until Doctor Caldwell dies or I do, and on the present arithmetic neither of those is going to be soon. Go to Pa. You have until the noon.'

Ruth let the hand go. She stood. She walked round the side of the stoep, past the kitchen window where her mother sat at the kitchen table with the basin and the spoon, and she did not stop and she did not look in and her mother did not look out, and she walked across the yard to the shed.


III

The shed was the shed.

It was the long low corrugated-iron building on the lower side of the kitchen garden where Pa had kept the lorry and the tractor and the ploughs and the harness and the hand tools for as long as Ruth could remember. The double doors at the front were folded back. The tractor was on its blocks at the centre of the floor. The pump was on the workbench against the side wall under the small window with the four panes that had taken the kitchen's old curtain ten years before. Pa was at the bench with his back to the door, in his working overalls and the brown leather apron he had worn at this work since he was a young man, with a stack of green-covered exercise books from the upper standard four set aside on the shelf above the bench beside the pencil he had been using when she had come up the drive.

He did not turn when Ruth came in.

He had heard her boots on the dust outside.

'The kettle is at the spirit ring,' he said. 'The mug is on the shelf above the bench. There is condensed milk in the tin and there is sugar in the cracked bowl. Make me one too. Two sugars.'

'Yes.'

She made the two cups of tea at the spirit ring on the lower shelf. The shelf was the same shelf. The condensed milk was in the same tin. The cracked bowl was the same bowl that had been on the kitchen dresser when she was three and had fallen off it in her grandmother's last visit in 1936 and had been brought out to the shed for the men's tea. She made the tea the way Pa liked it. She made hers the way she had made it in Cape Town for two years. She brought the two mugs over to the bench.

He set the spanner down. He took the mug. He drank a third of it standing at the bench. He set the mug on the bench beside the pump. He picked the spanner up and went back to the bolt he had been at when she came in.

'Sit on the stool,' he said. 'I shall work and you shall talk. If I stop the work, the talk will become a thing, and I would rather it stayed the kind of thing it is when one of us is busy.'

'Yes.'

She sat on the wooden stool against the wall. She put her own mug on the floor beside her feet. The shed in the late morning light was dim at the back and bright at the open doors, the sun coming through the small four-paned window onto the workbench and making a small bright square on the wood beside the pump where Pa was working. The smell of the shed was the smell of engine oil and old leather and the sweet cold smell of the cement floor that had been laid in 1928.

'Anna spoke this morning,' Ruth said.

'She speaks. It is one of the things she has always done well.'

'She said the August did not teach Ma anything.'

'No. It would not have been likely to.'

He turned the spanner. The bolt did not move. He turned it again. The bolt moved a quarter turn. He set the spanner aside and picked up a wire brush and began to brush the threads of the bolt clear of the rust that had built up on it.

'Tell me about the city.'

'I am writing the third year. I will sit the second-year examinations in November. I will get the marks. I will not get the prizes. The prizes go to a girl whose health has not been interrupted. Doctor Hayes-Whittaker has signed a letter to the registrar. Arbuthnot has been told. It is a quiet arrangement. The scholarship has not been retracted. It will not be retracted. Miss Pryce has been correct. She has not been kind. The two are separate, and at the residence, separate is the better one.'

'Yes.'

'I am at the residence still. I will be at the residence for the third year. After the third year I do not know.'

'You are well in the body.'

'I am well in the body. I am thinner. The kidney is the kidney. I drink the water. I will live to be old or I will not, and whether I do is not, on the present arithmetic, a question for now.'

'Catherine MacLeod has been in the city.'

'I have been to her house in Kenilworth twice. Once in the November and once in the February. She is what Boet said she was in the lorry. She is the kind of English colonial who takes the social register at the breakfast table and reads the *Cape Times* leader as if it had been written for her bridge afternoon. She has never been to a house where the kitchen worker eats at the kitchen table. She has never crossed the upper Hof Street into the lower city on foot. She thinks her bridge afternoons matter. They do not. She would be appalled to be told they do not, and would not understand the telling. But she is not unkind. She lent me the small flat above her garage for two weeks in the December when the residence closed for the holiday and when I had nowhere else to be. She did not ask me a single question about the kidney. She did not ask me a single question about Ma. She did not ask me about the scholarship. She read the paper at the breakfast table and she let me alone in the small flat. That is a kind of kindness I had not thought to expect from her. But she will not be the person I write to when I do not know what to do with the true thing.'

Pa turned the bolt again. It moved another quarter turn.

'Who do you write to,' he said.

'I write to no one about it. I have not been able to. I do not know how to make the true thing useful, Pa. And until the true thing can be made useful I do not know how to put it into a letter.'

He stopped working. He set the spanner down on the bench, deliberately, in the place beside the pump where the small bright square of sunlight from the four-paned window was working its way slowly across the wood. He turned to her.

'Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'I have been thirty years in this valley. I have been thirty years at the school at Merensky. I have been thirty years on the farm in the seasons when the school is on the holiday. I have been thirty years married to your mother. I have known the true things you are speaking of for the whole of those thirty years. I have not, in any of them, known how to make any of them useful in the sense the word is meant in the city.'

He paused.

'I have got up at five in the morning. I have done the marking on the stoep before breakfast. I have gone to the school. I have come back to the farm. I have sat at the supper table with your mother in the same chair I have sat in since 1919, and I have eaten what your mother put in front of me, and I have not, in any of those thirty years, asked her to be a different woman. She has not asked me to be a different man. We have lived inside the true thing for thirty years. That is a use, Ruth. It is not the use the city is going to teach you to want, and it is not the use you are looking for, but it is a use. It is the use the farm requires and that Anna requires and that Willi will require when he is old enough to need a household to grow up inside.'

He paused again. The small bright square of sunlight had moved another half-inch along the wood of the bench.

'I do not know whether it is a use that you require. I think it is not. You have to find your own use for the true thing. I do not know what that is. I do not know how you will find out. I do not know whether you will ever find out, or whether you will live alongside the true thing for forty years and not, in any one of them, know how to make it useful in the larger sense, and will simply do the work that is in front of you and be the person you are to the people who are in front of you. There is no rule for this, Ruth. There is no answer at the back of the book.'

He picked the spanner up.

'The bolt will come out in the next half hour. I shall mend the pump. The pump will work by the Saturday. The lorry will take me to Tzaneen on the Tuesday. Anna will sit on the stoep until the evening. Ma will be at the kitchen table at the basin. Boet will bring you tea at the noon. You will take the lorry from Boet to Pietersburg on the Friday morning and you will take the train to Cape Town on the Friday night and you will write the third-year examinations in November. That is what is in front of me. That is what is in front of you. The true thing will not be made useful by either of us today. But we are both inside it. That is, in a way that is not the way you are looking for, also a use.'

He turned back to the bench. He fitted the spanner to the bolt. He turned. The bolt came another quarter turn out.

Ruth sat on the stool with the mug at her feet and looked at the small bright square of sunlight on the bench beside the pump where the spanner had been. She remembered what Pa had not just said. He had not said that in '44 he had driven down to Pietersburg in the dry winter and sat at the parlour of St Joseph's for three hours with the matriculation certificate from Merensky in his coat pocket and would not leave the parlour until they had taken her name for the matric class. He had not said that Ma had not known he had gone until the place was confirmed. He had not said that he had not told Ma until the Friday after, when the letter had come up from the convent on the post, and that he had read the letter aloud to her at the supper table, and that Ma had not eaten after that supper, and that he had taken the next supper at the table alone. He had not said any of it. He never had. The not-saying was the saying. The scholarship was what Pa said when he said *Ruth*. She had known this since she was fifteen and had begun to be old enough to understand what a father had given her by the cost of what he had not been able to give his wife. She knew it now in the shed with the small bright square of sunlight on the bench beside the pump.

He turned back to the bench. He fitted the spanner to the bolt. He turned. The bolt came another quarter turn out.

Ruth sat on the stool with the mug at her feet and looked at the small bright square of sunlight on the bench beside the pump where the spanner had been.


IV

Boet came down at the noon.

He stopped at the open doors of the shed. He raised his hand once to Pa. He looked at Ruth. He came across the floor with the heavy quiet tread he had had since he had been a young man.

'Ruth.'

'Boet.'

He held out his hand for the longer second the conversation required. He did not say anything else. He inclined his head once at Pa. Pa nodded once at him without looking up from the bench.

Pa worked through to half past twelve. Ruth sat on the stool. Boet stood at the open doors looking out at the yard with his hat in his hand. They did not speak again until Pa set the spanner down at half past twelve and wiped his hands on the rag at the bench and untied the leather apron.

'The dinner is at one,' Pa said to Ruth. 'Ma sets the table for me and Willi. You and Boet will eat at the bench here. Anna will bring the bread out and will sit with you. The arrangement was made by Anna at the September. It is the arrangement we have when you come up. Ma does not say anything about it and we do not ask her to. The bread is in the kitchen. Anna will bring it out.'

'Yes.'

Pa hung the leather apron on the nail beside the bench. He went out of the shed and across the yard to the kitchen door and went in.

They ate at the bench. Anna brought the bread. Ruth and Boet and Anna ate the cold meat and the bread and the pickled cucumber out of the small enamel bowl Anna had carried from the kitchen, sitting on the stool and the bench and the upturned crate, and Anna spoke about a book she had read about the desert flowers of Namaqualand that Doctor Caldwell had brought her in the February, and Boet listened in the slow attentive way he listened to Anna because Anna was the household member who had no impatience in her, and Ruth sat with Anna on the stool until the spirit ring was cold and the bread was eaten.

At three Anna went back into the house to lie down. Ruth helped her up the stoep step and into the corridor as far as the door of her room. Anna stopped at the door.

'Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'Come up next April. Or in the May. Do not come in the June. Do not come in the August. Come in April when the chest is good and the seizures have spaced themselves out. Bring the train fare yourself. Catherine can write to me if she wants to. I will read her letter aloud to Willi.'

'Yes.'

Anna went into the room. The door closed.

Ruth walked back through the corridor and out through the kitchen door without going through the kitchen and across the yard to the shed. Pa was at the bench. The pump was in three pieces in front of him on the cloth. He did not turn. Boet was at the lorry at the front of the house warming the engine.

'I am going.'

'Yes. Boet will take you to Pietersburg. Boet will be back tomorrow with Mr van Rensburg. The Cape train is at five. The Pretoria connection is at half past ten in the morning. You will be in Cape Town on the Sunday.'

'Yes.'

He set the wrench down on the bench. He did not turn.

'Take care, Ruth.'

'I will.'

She went out of the shed.

She walked across the yard. The kitchen window above the dresser was empty. The kitchen door was closed. The lorry was at the front of the house with Boet at the open driver's door and her suitcase already in the cab beside the seat. She got into the cab. Boet got in beside her and started the engine.

She looked once at the shed.

Pa was at the open doors of the shed with the wrench in his hand.

He lifted his hand.
