CHAPTER 24

To Krugersdorp, Alone


I

Sarah came up the residence drive at twenty past nine in the morning of the second Tuesday in January.

Ruth had been packed since the Saturday. The cardboard suitcase from Letaba was on the floor by the door of Room 412 with the same twisted catch and the same salt-stained corner that had ridden the train down from Pietersburg in January 1949. The smaller leather case beside it held the books: the Pindar, the Tibullus that had ridden up to Letaba with her in June 1949 and which she had returned to Clara in the November without ever reading the second elegy, and which Clara had then given back to her in the December as a gift; the small Latin grammar she had bought at the Stuttafords stationer in October; the brown ledger in which she had been writing the long uneven sentences that were not a journal and not letters and not anything she had a name for. The coat was on the hook behind the door. The silk square Judith had given her in March of 1949 was in the inside pocket of the coat where it had ridden against the cream of her blouse for two years.

She had not slept the previous night. She had sat at the desk by the window for the last time and had watched the corridor lamp go on at the end of the corridor at five in the long blue summer dusk of a Cape January, and had heard the kettles going on in the rooms along the corridor, and had heard the bells of the typewriters, and had heard a girl in the room two doors down practising a Brahms intermezzo on the small upright piano her parents had had brought up to the residence for her in the November. She had taken the long bath at six in the empty bathroom at the end of the corridor. She had laid her clothes out on the chair beside the bed. She had got into bed at nine. She had not slept.

Miss Pryce had come up at seven in the morning to take the room key. She had stood at the door of Room 412 and had looked at the bare desk and the made bed and the empty hook behind the door and had said *Miss MacLeod*, and Ruth had said *Miss Pryce*, and Miss Pryce had taken the brass key from the small clean square on the desk where Ruth had set it and had put the key in the pocket of her cardigan and had inclined her head once and had gone out, and that had been the last conversation Ruth would have with the Warden.

At twenty past nine Mr Steyn the porter knocked at the door of Room 412 and said that Miss Davids was at the lodge.

Ruth opened the door.

Sarah was at the foot of the stairs in the heavy brown winter coat she had worn at the Cohen kitchen door for two years. The coat was buttoned to the chin. Her hat was the small dark hat she had worn in Hanover Street on the morning Ruth had walked down with Miriam in October 1949. She was carrying a brown-paper parcel under one arm and a small canvas bag in the other hand.

'Sarah.'

'Ruth.'

'You did not have to come.'

'I came.'

She did not come up the stairs. She stood at the foot of the stairs in the small clean morning light of the residence hall and waited for Ruth to come down. Ruth went back into the room and lifted the cardboard suitcase from the floor and the leather case from beside it and put on the coat from the hook behind the door and looked once at Room 412 from the doorway. The window was open six inches. The light came in onto the bare desk. The lace runner on the chest of drawers was the same lace runner the residence had supplied in 1949. The bed was made.

She closed the door of Room 412. She did not lock it. She did not have the key any more. She walked the length of the corridor and down the stairs to where Sarah was waiting.

Sarah took the leather case from her hand without asking.

'The lorry is at the gate. Mr Steyn telephoned the rank at half past eight. The lorry is the same lorry that took the Cohens down to the station last September. The driver is the same driver. He knows the time of the train. He has the route already.'

'You arranged the lorry.'

'I arranged the lorry. Mrs Cohen paid for the lorry. You can argue with her about that on the next visit to Sea Point. She said to tell you she said that you should not argue. She also said that Judith would have come this morning but that the dinner at Sea Point last night went past midnight and Judith would not be useful at the platform before noon, and that you and she had said your goodbyes at Brownlow Road on the Sunday in the way that you would prefer to remember them, and that the platform is the place for the friends who do the practical thing, and that this morning Sarah is doing the practical thing.'

'Yes.'

'Come. The train is at five past eleven. The lorry is at the gate.'


II

The lorry took the long Newlands slope down through the oak-canopied length of Main Road and into the lower city in the small bright traffic of a Cape Town January morning. Ruth sat in the back beside Sarah. The cardboard suitcase was at her feet. The leather case was on Sarah's lap. Sarah held the brown-paper parcel against her own ribs the way Ruth had held the loaf against her ribs on the tram up from Wale Street in May of 1949. Ruth saw this and said nothing.

The driver did not speak. Ruth had ridden in his lorry once before, as Sarah had said, when the Cohens had taken her down to Park Station in September on her way to Letaba for the second visit. He was a young man of perhaps thirty in a clean grey jacket with a white-collared shirt under it and a peaked cap. He drove well. He took Adderley at the slow speed the city's morning required.

The lorry stopped at the upper end of the station forecourt at five and twenty to eleven. The driver carried the cardboard suitcase to the platform entrance and set it down beside the kerb and inclined his head once to Sarah and went back to the lorry. Sarah carried the leather case. Ruth carried the coat over her arm because the lower city in January was already too warm for the coat to be worn. They went into the station.

The Cape Town railway station in January 1951 was full of the morning's traffic: clerks coming in on the suburban trains from Wynberg and Plumstead in their dark linen suits, women returning to the upper suburbs after early errands at the harbour markets, a small group of nurses from Groote Schuur in their starched white aprons changing trains for the lower line, a porter wheeling an empty trolley at the slow careful pace the porters wheeled trolleys in. The high vaulted glass roof above the platforms was full of the bright dusty light of the Cape morning. The boards above the ticket counters showed the morning's departures in white painted lettering on the long horizontal slats.

Platform Three was the platform for the Northern train.

They went down to Platform Three. The train was already on the platform, the carriages painted the standard South African Railways green and cream with the dark red running line at the lower edge, the engine breathing the slow steady steam of an engine that has been on the platform for thirty minutes and will be on the platform for another twenty. The third-class carriages were at the rear. The compartment Ruth had reserved was in the second carriage from the engine, at the front of the third-class section. She had her ticket in the right pocket of the coat. The reservation was for compartment six, lower bunk, window side.

They walked down the length of the platform to the second carriage from the engine. Sarah set the leather case down. Ruth set the cardboard suitcase down. They stood on the platform.

At the far end of Platform Three, beside a stack of crates marked LETABA SYNDICATE / TZANEEN, was a man in a heavy brown winter coat with a sheaf of consignment papers folded in his hand. He was standing at the edge of the platform with his hat in his other hand and was looking down the platform toward the second carriage from the engine. He was Boet van Eden. Ruth had not, in any of the five days of her last week in Cape Town, expected him.

'He came down with the goods,' Sarah said. 'On the goods train two days back. He has been at the boarding house in the upper city. He will be on the goods train back tomorrow night.'

'You knew.'

'He came round to the Cohen kitchen at the back door yesterday afternoon at the time he knew I would be there. He asked me which platform and which time. He did not ask anything else. The other reason he is on the platform this morning he will not say. You are not required to say anything to it, Ruth. He has come because he came.'

'Yes.'

Ruth raised her hand once toward the far end of the platform. Boet raised his hand back. He did not come down the platform toward them. He stood with the consignment papers in his hand and watched, and Sarah turned back to Ruth.

Sarah did not, at first, say anything more. She put the brown-paper parcel down on the cardboard suitcase. She turned to Ruth. She put both her hands on the lapels of the coat Ruth was carrying over her arm and lifted the coat off Ruth's arm and held it between them.

'Put the coat on, Ruth. The carriage is warm now. The Karoo is cold at night.'

'Yes.'

Ruth put the coat on. Sarah did not let go of the lapels while Ruth put it on. When the coat was on Sarah did not step back. She straightened the collar at the back of Ruth's neck. She brought the lapels even at the throat. She fastened the upper button. She stepped back and looked at Ruth and stepped forward again and undid the upper button. She fastened the second and third buttons instead. She brushed the right shoulder once with the flat of her hand. She moved Ruth's hair where it had got under the collar at the right side and lifted it free.

'There.'

She picked the brown-paper parcel up from the cardboard suitcase.

'The parcel goes in the inside pocket. Not the outside. The outside pocket is for the ticket. The inside pocket is the one against the silk square. The silk square moves to the other inside pocket. The parcel is for the journey. There is a piece of biltong wrapped in greaseproof and there is a packet of rusks and there is half a brown loaf wrapped in waxed paper and there is a small jar of fish paste with a tin spoon I do not need back. There is also a folded piece of paper. The folded piece of paper is the address of my cousin Mariam in Sophiatown. Mariam is not in Krugersdorp. Krugersdorp does not have anyone of mine in it. Sophiatown is forty minutes by train from Krugersdorp on the West Rand line. If you need anyone to know where you are, you go to Mariam. If you do not need anyone to know where you are, you put the folded paper in a drawer and you leave it. But you take the address now because you do not know now whether you will need it later. That is how addresses work.'

'Yes, Sarah.'

'Put it in.'

Ruth opened the coat. She took the silk square from the inside pocket where it had ridden for two years and moved it to the other inside pocket. She put the brown-paper parcel in the inside pocket where the silk square had been. The pocket was full now in the way it had not been full since 1949. She buttoned the coat back over it.

Sarah looked at her.

'Ruth.'

'Yes.'

'You are a person who reads everything in the room before sitting down. That is what Mrs Cohen said about you on the second visit and she was right. Krugersdorp will not be a room you have been in. You will read it. You will read it the way you read the Bo-Kaap kitchen and the Cohen dining room and the District tailor and the Lawrence drawing room. You will read it correctly. You will know after one week what kind of place it is. The library will be smaller than the library at the university. The town will be smaller than Cape Town. The reading will be what it always was. That part of you does not need a parcel from me.'

'Yes.'

'But the journey is two days. The carriage is yours from Cape Town to Bloemfontein and then you change at Park Station and the West Rand line takes you out from Park Station in the late afternoon. You will be in Krugersdorp at six in the evening on the Thursday. The boarding house has been written to. The post office account in Krugersdorp has been opened in your name. The library starts on the Monday. The five days between the Thursday and the Monday are for the reading of the room.'

'Yes.'

She lifted Ruth's right hand at the wrist and held it for a longer second than the conversation required and let it go.

'Go.'

Ruth lifted the cardboard suitcase. The leather case was already at her side. She turned. She stepped up onto the lower step of the carriage.

She turned back at the top of the step.

'Sarah.'

'Yes.'

'I do not have a way of saying.'

'No. The way of saying is to do the work in Krugersdorp and to write me a letter from the boarding house in the first week and to come down to Cape Town in a year if Krugersdorp gives you the leave. There is no other way of saying. There is not a sentence for it and the sentence would not be the saying. The work is the saying. Go.'

Ruth looked once down the length of the platform. Boet was where he had been. He had not moved.

'Boet,' she said, in the voice she had used in the kitchen to her brother and her sister, the voice the platform had not heard until now.

He inclined his head once, from the far end of the platform.

'Tell Anna and Willi I am at the new place by the Sunday morning,' Ruth said. 'Tell Pa.'

'I will tell them on the Friday at the noon when I come through the kitchen with the syndicate papers from the Pietersburg run. Pa will tell Anna again at the supper on the Friday. She will know by the Sunday.'

'Thank you.'

He did not say anything else. He raised his hand once toward the carriage. Ruth raised her hand back.

Ruth went into the carriage.


III

Compartment six was a six-bunk third-class compartment with the two outer bunks already occupied by an older woman and her granddaughter who were going as far as De Aar. The window-side lower bunk was hers. She put the cardboard suitcase under the bunk and the leather case at the foot. She put her ticket on the small folding table under the window. She kept the coat on.

The older woman across the compartment was perhaps seventy, in a dark blue cotton dress and a brown jacket of the kind the country towns of the Karoo had produced for forty years, with a small straw hat on her lap that she had taken off when the carriage began to warm in the morning sun. The granddaughter was perhaps twelve, in a green pinafore and a white blouse and the round black school shoes a girl of twelve in the upper Karoo would have been bought for the year. The granddaughter had a book on her lap that she was reading without looking up, a small green-covered school edition of *Treasure Island* with the paper jacket repaired at the spine in three places by a hand that knew its way around a book. The older woman had a cloth bag at her side that held two oranges, a packet of rusks tied with brown string, and a small folded piece of crochet she had taken out at the start of the journey and set down again without picking it up to work it. She was looking out of the window at the same place Ruth was looking. They had not spoken to Ruth and they had not spoken to each other and the speaking would or would not happen at the times the carriage had not yet decided.

The whistle went at five past eleven.

The train began to move with the long slow first jolt of an engine taking the load. The platform began to slide past the window. Ruth looked out at the platform.

Sarah was at the place she had been standing. She had not moved. She raised her hand once. Ruth raised her hand back through the window glass. Boet was at the far end of Platform Three where he had been the whole morning. He raised his hand once. The platform moved past. Sarah was no longer in the line of sight. Boet was no longer in the line of sight. The two of them went out of the line of sight at different speeds because they had been standing at different ends of the platform.

The train came out of the long vaulted glass of the station into the bright open light of the lower city. It crossed the lower yards with the slow careful tread of an engine clearing the points. It passed the harbour cranes on the right. It passed the lower edge of the Bo-Kaap on the left, the painted houses small at this distance against the lower slope of Signal Hill. It picked up speed.

The conductor came through at the first stop after Salt River. He was a grey-haired man in the dark blue uniform of the South African Railways with the black peaked cap and the small tin punch on a leather lanyard at his hip. He took the older woman's tickets first and punched them and handed them back. He took Ruth's ticket and looked at it for a longer second than the others. He looked at her face, briefly, in the way conductors looked at single women travelling alone. He punched the ticket. He handed it back.

'Krugersdorp.'

'Yes.'

'You change at Bloemfontein for the Pretoria connection. The Pretoria train is at half past nine in the morning. You change again at Park Station for the West Rand. You will have eight hours at Park Station between the trains. The waiting room at Park Station is closed to single women between four and six in the afternoon. You may use the front room of the station hotel. The desk clerk will hold your case.'

'Thank you.'

'Your first time on this line.'

'Yes.'

'It is a long line. Sleep when the carriage gets cold.'

He inclined his head once and went on through the connecting door at the end of the carriage. Ruth put the ticket back in the outside pocket of her coat. The older woman across the compartment looked at her then for the first time, briefly, with the same kind of measured attention the conductor had given her, and then looked away again.

Ruth sat by the window with the coat on and the brown-paper parcel against her ribs through the inside pocket and the silk square in the other inside pocket against her blouse and the small folded piece of paper with Mariam's address inside the brown-paper parcel. She did not weep. She did not turn her face from the window. She watched.

The line went out through Maitland and the lower industrial suburbs and the broad flat of the Cape Flats and into the wine farms beyond Bellville. The mountain was behind her now and to the left, the great rock face still visible above the lower hills, the cloud beginning to gather along the upper edge of the table at this hour the way it gathered every January morning. The line went on through Brackenfell and Kraaifontein and into the open country where the vines came up to the verges. The mountain was smaller now. The cloud at the upper edge had deepened into the long slow tablecloth that poured down the upper slope and lifted again in the wind that Cape Town residents could read by eye for the rest of the day's weather.

At the second stop past Bellville the older woman opened her cloth bag and took out one of the two oranges and peeled it on a folded cloth in her lap with the slow steady motion of a woman who had peeled an orange on a moving train fifty times. The carriage filled with the sharp clean scent of the peel. She broke the orange into segments with her thumb. She passed three segments to her granddaughter. She set three more segments on the folded cloth and held the cloth out across the small folding table to Ruth.

'Take.'

It was the first word the older woman had said.

'Thank you.'

Ruth took the segments. She ate them slowly. The orange was cold and sharp and the juice ran down her chin and she caught it with the side of her hand. The older woman watched without watching. The granddaughter went back to the book.

'You are also going north.'

'I am going to Krugersdorp.'

'I do not go to Krugersdorp. We go to De Aar. My daughter is at De Aar. The granddaughter spends the holiday with her mother and goes back to the school in Beaufort West in March. The school is a good one. They have not had to take her out for the chest in three years.'

The granddaughter looked up from the book. She did not say anything.

'My sister also has a chest condition,' Ruth said. 'She is at home in the Northern Transvaal. The chest is the chest.'

The older woman nodded once.

'The chest is what it is. The doctors are what they are. The girls who carry it carry it well or they do not carry it. This one carries it. Yours.'

'Mine carries it.'

The granddaughter went back to the book. The older woman did not say anything else for the next stretch of the line.

Ruth put her hand to the inside pocket of her coat and brought out the brown-paper parcel Sarah had given her at the platform. She set the parcel on the small folding table under the window. She unwrapped the outer paper carefully so that the wrapping could be folded back. The piece of biltong wrapped in greaseproof was on top. The packet of rusks was beneath it. The half brown loaf wrapped in waxed paper was beneath the rusks. The small jar of fish paste with the tin spoon was on the side. Beneath the loaf, against the inside fold of the brown paper, was a folded square of pale grey paper that Sarah had mentioned in her itemising at the platform but had not pointed to as Ruth had been looking at the food.

Ruth took the folded paper out. She set it on the table beside the rusks. She rewrapped the parcel and put it back in the inside pocket of her coat. She unfolded the grey paper.

The hand was Sarah's hand, the careful upright letters formed slowly on the page in the way Sarah had been taught to form letters at the mission school in Hanover Street in 1902. The address was in three lines, with the time and direction beneath.

> Mrs Mariam Daniels
> 17 Edith Street
> Sophiatown, Johannesburg
>
> Tram from Park Station, Bree Street stop. Number 27. Forty minutes.

That was all that was on the paper.

Ruth read it twice. She refolded it along the same crease. She put it in the inside pocket against the silk square Judith had given her in March of 1949 where the silk square had been since Sarah had moved it at the platform. She sat with her hand against the outside of the coat where the folded paper now sat against the silk and the silk against the cream of her blouse.

The older woman across the compartment was watching her.

'You have an address.'

'I have an address.'

'Hold it. The first city is the city you find with an address. The second city is the city you find without one. The Krugersdorp will be the second one. Sophiatown will be the first. Begin with the first.'

She did not say anything else. She took out the second orange and began to peel it.

The train went through Paarl in the noon and through Wellington in the early afternoon and reached the long climb toward the Tulbagh Pass at three. The carriages began the slow steady ascent. The mountain behind her was now a single grey shape against the southern sky, the table cloud still on it but the table itself blurring at this distance into the rest of the Boland range. She sat with her hand at the window-frame and watched.

She watched the carriage and the country with the same attention she had carried into the Bo-Kaap kitchen on the Saturday in October 1949 and into the Cohen dining room on the Friday in March 1949 and into the Lawrence drawing room on the Sunday in October 1949. The granddaughter had finished *Treasure Island* and had taken a second smaller book from the older woman's bag, also a green-covered school edition, this one of a Latin reader Ruth recognised from her own first year at the convent in 1944. The older woman was working the folded piece of crochet now, the hook moving in the small fine repeated motion of a woman whose hands knew the work entirely. The carriage smelt of the orange peel and the rusks and the cold metal of the steam from the engine and the dry warmth of the wool of three coats. The light from the upper sash of the window fell on the small folding table and on Ruth's gloved hand on the window-frame. The line of the upper Tulbagh ridge came up on the left of the carriage and then on the right of the carriage as the line took its first long bend toward the pass.

She read the carriage. She read the older woman who had told her *hold it*. She read the granddaughter who had been bought the round black school shoes for the year and who would carry the chest the way the older woman had said girls carried it. She read the conductor's instruction about the waiting room at Park Station and what the instruction had meant. She read the country going past the window in the way she had read the District and the dining rooms and the drawing rooms. The reading was not new. The reading was what she did. What was new was the country. The reading was the same.

The line reached the upper end of the pass at four. The line curved.

The line curved north and inland from the coast at the upper end of the pass. The carriages took the bend in the slow steady way the carriages took bends in mountain track. The window swept the southern sky. The mountain held its shape against the southern horizon for a long second longer than Ruth had thought it would. Then the next ridge of the pass came up between the line and the south. Then the line straightened on the upper plateau and went on east across the high beginning of the Karoo. Then the next ridge.

She did not see the mountain again.

The line curved inland and the rock disappeared.
